We can often predict a reaction if we have seen a similar reaction before.

Example: sodium (Na) reacts with water (H<sub>2</sub>O) to form sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and H<sub>2</sub> gas:

2 Na(s) + 2 H<sub>2</sub>O(l) $\longrightarrow$ 2 NaOH(aq) + H<sub>2</sub>(g)

Potassium (K) is in the same family of elements as sodium and displays similar chemistry, so you could predict that the reaction of K with H<sub>2</sub>O would be similar to that of Na:

2 K(s) + 2 H<sub>2</sub>O(l) $\longrightarrow$ 2 KOH(aq) + H<sub>2</sub> (g)

all alkali metals react with water to form their hydroxide compounds and hydrogen.

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Combination and Decomposition Reactions</u></span>

In <u>combination reactions</u>, two or more compound react to form a singe, more complex compound. The general chemical equation for combination reactions is:

A + B $\longrightarrow$ C

In <u>decomposition reactions</u>, one substance undergoes a reaction to form two or more simpler products. This often happens when compounds are heated or electricity is added. The general chemical equation for decomposition reaction is:

A $\longrightarrow$ B + C

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Combustion in Air</u></span> 

<u>Combustion reactions</u> are rapid reactions that produce a flame.

Most common combustion reactions involve oxygen (O<sub>2</sub>) from the air as a reactant.

A common class of compounds which can participate in combustion reactions are hydrocarbons. These consist of methane (CH<sub>4</sub>), propane (C<sub>3</sub>H<sub>8</sub>), butane (C<sub>4</sub>H<sub>10</sub>), and octane (C<sub>8</sub>H<sub>18</sub>).

Other compounds which contain carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, also combust in the presence of oxygen to produce CO<sub>2</sub> and H<sub>2</sub>O.