<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Formula and Molecular Weights</u></span> 

The <u>formula weight </u>of a substance is the sum of the atomic weights of each atom in its chemical formula. For example, water (H<sub>2</sub>O) has a formula weight of: 

$2 \times (1.0079~amu) + 1 \times (15.9994~amu) = 18.01528~amu$

If a substance exits as discrete molecules (as with atoms that are chemically bonded together) then the **chemical formula is the molecular formula, and the formula weight is the molecular weight.**

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Percentage Composition from Formulas</u></span> 

It is sometimes important to know the percentage by mass of each type of element in a compound.

The law of Definite proportions states that a chemical compound always contains the same proportion of elements by mass, or that the percent composition is **constant** (with exceptions).

<u>Percent composition</u> - the percentage of each element present in a pure substance.

Take for example methane (CH<sub>4</sub>) with a formula and molecular weight:

$1 \times (12.011~amu) + 4 \times (1.008) = 16.043~amu$

the relative (mass) percentages of carbon and hydrogen are:

$\% C=\dfrac{1\times(12.011~amu)}{16.043~amu} = 0.749 = 74.9\%$

$\%H=\dfrac{4\times(1.008~amu)}{16.043~amu}=0.251=25.1\%$

The mass percentage of each element can be checked by verifying that the sum of the percentages of all elements in the compound is 100%

You can also calculate mass percentages using atomic masses and molecular masses, with atomic mass units (amu). Because the answer is a ratio, it can be expressed as a percentage.

---

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Determining the Empirical Formula of Penicillin</u></span> 

Just as the empirical formula of a substance can be used to determine its percent composition, the percent composition of a sample can be used to determine its empirical formula, which can then be used to determine its molecular formula. This was done to determine the empirical and molecular formulas of penicillin.

$\dfrac{mass~(g)}{molar~mass~(g/mol)}=(g)~(\dfrac{mol}{g})=mol$

In some cases, one or more of the subscripts in a formula calculated using this procedure may not be integers. Rounding errors in the calculations as well as experimental errors in the data can result in non-integral ratios. 

In particular, ratios of 1.5, 1.33, or 1.25 suggest that you should multiply all subscripts in the formula by 2, 3 ,or 4, respectively. Only if the ratio is within 5% of an integral value should one consider rounding to the nearest integer.

When given percent composition and asked for empirical formula:
- Assume a 100 g sample and calculate the number of moles of each element in that sample.
- Obtain the relative numbers of atoms of each element in the compound by dividing the number of moles of each element in the 100 g sample by the number of moles of the element present in the smallest amount.
- If the ratios are not integers, multiply all subscripts by the same number to give integral values.
- If given an ionic compound, identify the anion and cation and write the formula so that the charges balance.

---

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>From Empirical Formula to Molecular Formula</u></span> 

The empirical formula gives only the relative numbers of atoms in a substance in the smallest possible ratio. For a covalent substance, chemists are usually more interested in the molecular formula, which gives the actual number of atoms of each kind present per molecule.

<u>Formula mass:</u> the molar mass of the formula unit, which is the sum of the atomic masses of the elements in the empirical formula multiplied by their respective subscripts.

---

$moles~X = Mass~(g)~\times\dfrac{1~mol~X}{atomic~mass~(g)~X}=~num~of~mol~X$

Mass is the weight in grams of an element when assuming a 100.0g sample of a compound.

---

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Summary</u></span> 

The empirical formula of a substance can be calculated from its percent composition, and the molecular formula can be determined from the empirical formula and the compound’s molar mass. The empirical formula of a substance can be calculated from the experimentally determined percent composition, the percentage of each element present in a pure substance by mass. In many cases, these percentages can be determined by combustion analysis. If the molar mass of the compound is known, the molecular formula can be determined from the empirical formula.