The reactant that restricts the amount of product obtained is called the <u>limiting reactant.</u>

The reactant that remains after a reaction has gone to completion is in excess.

<u>Non Chemical Example:</u>
To make brownies there is a balanced equation:

1 box mix + 2 eggs $\longrightarrow$ 1 batch brownies

If you buy 2 boxes of mix and a dozen eggs, <u>the limiting reactant becomes the box mix</u> as you will only end up using 4 of the eggs. 

Even though the ratio in the equation is 2:1, the ratio in your possession is 6:1 (12 eggs 2 boxes). No matter how many eggs, you will only be able to make 2 batches of brownies.

<iframe width="366" height="206" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/HmDm1qpNUD0" title="Determining the Limiting Reactant and Theoretical Yield for a Reaction" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

---

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Limiting Reactants in Solutions</u></span> 

<iframe width="366" height="206" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/eOXTliL-gNw" title="Limiting Reactant Problems Using Molarities" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

---

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Theoretical Yields</u></span> 
When reactants are not present in stoichiometric quantities, the limiting reactant determines the maximum amount of product that can be formed from the reactants. The amount of product calculated in this way is the <u>theoretical yield</u>, the amount obtained if the reaction occurred perfectly and the purification method were 100% efficient.

Less product is always obtained than is theoretically possible because of mechanical losses (like spilling and other malfunctions). The actual yield (measured mass of products obtained form a reaction) is always less than the theoretical yield.

The <u>percent yield</u> of a reaction is the ratio of the actual yield to the theoretical yield:


$percent~yield= \dfrac{actual~yield~(g)}{theoretical~yield~(g)}\times 100\%$


In the lab, you may occasionally get a yield greater than 100%. This usually happens when the product is impure or is wet with a solvent such as water.

A 100% yield means that everything worked perfectly and all product that could've been produced, was. 80%-90% is considered good or excellent—50% is only fair.

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Summary</u></span> 
The stoichiometry of a balanced chemical equation identifies the maximum amount of product that can be obtained. The stoichiometry of a reaction describes the relative amounts of reactants and products in a balanced chemical equation. A stoichiometric quantity of a reactant is the amount necessary to react completely with the other reactant(s). If a quantity of a reactant remains unconsumed after complete reaction has occurred, it is in excess. The reactant that is consumed first and limits the amount of product(s) that can be obtained is the limiting reactant. To identify the limiting reactant, calculate the number of moles of each reactant present and compare this ratio to the mole ratio of the reactants in the balanced chemical equation. The maximum amount of product(s) that can be obtained in a reaction from a given amount of reactant(s) is the theoretical yield of the reaction. The actual yield is the amount of product(s) actually obtained in the reaction; it cannot exceed the theoretical yield. The percent yield of a reaction is the ratio of the actual yield to the theoretical yield, expressed as a percentage.