i
In a 2-Page essay response:

- discuss what the documentary asserts about the dangers of sugar and how we can combat its prominent threat to our well-being.

- discuss how various ethnicities are impacted by the epidemic of obesity and the over consumption of sugar in regard to cultural background, education, and common food trends of American culture. 

- What are some of the major deterrents to eating healthy and how can the road to a healthier diet be paved early in life?

Cite scenes, data, and dialogue from the documentary to support your analysis and
perspectives.

link to documentary:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=moQZd1-BC0Y

---

<u>Dr. Robert Lustig</u> talks about the issue of obesity.


Lustig refers to the issue as an epidemic due to the spread of obesity seen within the last few decades.


## Ease of access / convenience

people don't have time to prepare food so they resort to fast food.

society today has been built around ease of use and accessibility, people more prone to eating poorly.



# Dangers of sugar

"A calorie is not a calorie"

While total calories do explain an increase in diabetes rates around the world, the effect size is very small. When you take a closer look it becomes apparent that sugar is the only type of calories that has direct correlation to the increase. 12:54-13:20.

A graph at 13:21 shows that the world sugar consumption has gone from 98 million tons in 1985 to 160 million tons in 2010. At 13:33 it is further shown that the global diabetes prevalence has gone from 30 million people in 1985 to 346 million people in 2010. creating a clear image of the effect of sugar.

"sugar is 50 times more potent than total calories in explaining diabetes rates worldwide" 13:24-13:33.

"sugar, because of its unique composition, is the only food on the planet that is both fat and carbohydrate at the same time" 13:59-14:10.


sugar contains glucose and fructose molecules. glucose is fine and used by most cells in your body and is extremely important for your cells to run, however fructose is extremely bad is requires 100% digestion from your liver (similarly to alcohol), leading to many issues such as:
- more liver fat that cant be exported
- more liver insulin resistance (which requires your body to produce more insulin)
- weight gain due to production of more fat cells
- high blood pressure due to the production of extra insulin
- heart disease
- cancer due to increased cell division
- dementia due to the changes caused in the brain
- diabetes due to bodies struggle to continue producing said insulin

^^All mentioned at 17:19 and before


### Effects on other cultures

The issue gets worse as it has been found that poorer communities are more susceptible to poor eating habits.

Lustig states "You cant go into a poor neighborhood in America and get something that's not processed...They don't have availability" (52:08-52:19).

 he goes further to state "if you have no choice, how can it be personal responsibility" (52:23-52:28)



# Deterrents to healthy eating

the industrial global diet has led to the spread of many highly processed and unhealthy foods leading to harmful effects on our hormones causing us to enter a cycle of obesity.

the over production of insulin in our bodies from the spread of these foods has ruined the useful effects if the leptin hormone our bodies have to make us know when to stop eating (seen at hunger and hormones - a vicious cycle).

reward system- our brain has a reward system and these widespread foods set it off.

These foods activate the "wanting" part of the system but give the pleasure part of the system.
"... like living with an urge you cant satisfy" 29:55-29:58.
This leads many people to overeat to try to achieve the satisfaction that their brain is chasing.

essentially like an addiction, where people will continue eating and their tolerance to dopamine they receive, only grows until they need to eat so much to achieve any amount. 30;21

"sugar specifically down regulates the same receptors...in the reward center as does all of these other addictive abusive compounds" 31:14-31:29.

obesity/overeating habits have been found to transfer onto kids. If a pregnant woman is obese, it is likely their kid will be too.

Stress also has been found to have direct correlation to unhealthy eating as people tend to care less about what they eat when stressed. It is important to stay mindful and pay attention when you are stressed in order to prevent this.

<u>How to  prevent sugar diets in for future generations? Lustig provides four tips:</u>
- get rid of all sugared beverages, even juice. "there is no such thing as a good sugary beverage"
- keep insulin down. fiber consumption will lessen your insulin response, you want 3 grams of fiber or more. "your insulin wont go up as high because your blood sugar won't go up as high"
- wait 20 minutes or more for second portions. Your hunger hormone (called ghrelin) will tell your brain your hungry before the food has even reached the end of your intestine. If you wait 20 minutes, the food will have reached the end and you will know if you actually need to eat or not.
- "buy" screen time with activity. use screen time as a reward for activity to stay healthy







---

# Quotes

- ".. in 30 years we have gone from being svelte, if you will, to basically being unbelievably sick." 01:34-01:49
- "the economics of food determine how fat our cells are" (49:09-49:13).
-  "currently in the store 80% of the food has been laced with sugar"



