
## Topic : <u>Community College versus the Four-Year University</u>
---

Need at least two sources (planning on 3)

“Views tend to vary greatly among students regarding the issue of attending a “junior college” for first two years of a  
bachelor’s degree versus beginning their studies at a major “four-year” institution. 

Compare and contrast the pros and cons of completing the freshman and sophomore years at these institutions, ultimately arguing how one is preferable to the other.” (Two Secondary Sources Required)


Structure will be 5 paragraphs: 

### <u>Introduction Paragraph</u>
---

introduce the topic explaining how there are benefits to each college.

### <u>Body Paragraph #1</u> - Cost Comparison
---

<u>Community College</u> - Cheaper, but the lesser cost may be apparent.
- If your degree plan is only two years (associates), Community college is definitely the best way to go from an economic standpoint. 
- Going to community college is far cheaper and is a great plan for people planning on transferring.
- Can save thousands just by doing your first two years in community college.
 
<u>4-year college</u> - Although more expensive, usually higher quality classes.
   - Provided with more opportunities such as internships, bigger colleges look better for employers.
   - you can always transfer from a 2-year community college

### <u>Body Paragraph #2</u> - Location/Accessibility
---

<u>Community College</u> - Extremely easy to get into, usually little to no requirements. 
- You can do online/go to a community college close to home.

<u>4-year college</u> - Very limited to location. 
- It is extremely likely that you will have to move.
- 

### <u>Body paragraph #3</u> - Flexibility
---

<u>Community College</u> - Less worry about grades/schedule
- Usually fairly lenient, less strict. Allows for flexible schedule.
- many community college students are part-time.

<u>4-year college</u> - Significantly more strict.
- You will need to dedicate a lot more time. Harder classes = more dedication to work.
- Little to no lenience for important life events.




# Sources
---



---
##### flexibility (sum down):

"Martin Schell, a member of the Coast Guard Reserve, was summoned to active duty in the final months of his freshman year at Oregon State University in Corvallis. Several months later, when his training in California had ended, Schell returned to Oregon. By then it was too late to register for his sophomore year. But by enrolling at Portland Community College, Schell is making up his second-year courses and will begin his junior year at the Corvallis campus on schedule" (Schrof para. 7).





Schrof, Joannie M. “Community Colleges. (Cover Story).” _U.S. News & World Report_, vol. 115, no. 13, Oct. 1993, p. 126. _EBSCOhost_, search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&AuthType=ip,cpid&custid=s1088435&db=a9h&AN=9309307546&site=ehost-live.

---
##### Location/aAccessibility

""




---