The identity of an element is defined by its atomic number (Z),  the number of protons in the nucleus of an atom of the element. The atomic number is therefore different for each element. The known elements are arranged in order of increasing Z in the periodic table. The chemistry of each element is determined by its number of protons and electrons. In a neutral atom, the number of electrons equals the number of protons.

 The rows of the table are called periods, and they are numbered from 1 to 7. The elements are stacked in such a way that elements with similar chemical properties form vertical columns, called groups, numbered from 1 to 18.

- Groups 1, 2, and 13–18 are the main group elements
- Groups 3–12 are in the middle of the periodic table and are the transition elements
- The two rows of 14 elements at the bottom of the periodic table are the lanthanides and the actinides, whose positions in the periodic table are indicated in group 3.

---

<span style="color:#ffc000"><u>Metals, Nonmetals, and Semimetals</u>
</span>

The distinction between metals and nonmetals is one of the most fundamental in chemistry. <u>Metals</u> are good conductors of heat; they can be pulled into wires because they are ductile; they can be hammered or pressed into thin sheets or foils because they are malleable; and most have a shiny appearance, so they are lustrous. The vast majority of the known elements are metals. Of the metals, only mercury is a liquid at room temperature and pressure; all the rest are solids.

<u>Nonmetals</u>, in contrast, are generally poor conductors of heat and electricity and are not lustrous. Nonmetals can be gases (such as chlorine), liquids (such as bromine), or solids (such as iodine) at room temperature and pressure. Most solid nonmetals are brittle, so they break into small pieces when hit with a hammer or pulled into a wire. 

As expected, <u>semimetals</u> exhibit properties intermediate between metals and nonmetals.

---

<span style="color:#ffc000"><u>Groups</u></span>

The periodic table is arranged so that elements with similar chemical behaviors are in the same group

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Group 1: Alkali Metals</u></span>
The alkali metals are lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium, cesium, and francium. Hydrogen is unique in that it is generally placed in Group 1, but it is not a metal. The compounds of the alkali metals are common in nature and daily life (ex: table salt or batteries).

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Goup 2: Alkaline Earth Metals</u></span>
The alkaline earth metals are beryllium, magnesium, calcium, strontium, barium, and radium.

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Group 17: Halogens</u></span>
The halogens are fluorine, chlorine, bromine, iodine, and astatine. The name halogen is derived from the Greek words for “salt forming,” which reflects that all the halogens react readily with metals to form compounds, such as sodium chloride and calcium chloride.

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Group 18: Noble Gases</u></span> 
The noble gases are helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon, and radon. Composed of only single atoms (monatomic). At room temperature and pressure, they are unreactive gases.

---
<u>Summary</u>
The periodic table is used as a predictive tool. It arranges of the elements in order of increasing atomic number. Elements that exhibit similar chemistry appear in vertical columns called groups (numbered 1–18 from left to right); the seven horizontal rows are called periods. Some of the groups have widely-used common names, including the alkali metals (Group 1) and the alkaline earth metals (Group 2) on the far left, and the halogens (Group 17) and the noble gases (Group 18) on the far right. The elements can be broadly divided into metals, nonmetals, and semimetals. Semimetals exhibit properties intermediate between those of metals and nonmetals. Metals are located on the left of the periodic table, and nonmetals are located on the upper right. They are separated by a diagonal band of semimetals. Metals are lustrous, good conductors of electricity, and readily shaped (they are ductile and malleable), whereas solid nonmetals are generally brittle and poor electrical conductors. Other important groupings of elements in the periodic table are the main group elements, the transition metals, the lanthanides, and the actinides.