
 
 **Ions are atoms or assemblies of atoms that have a net electrical charge.** 
- Ions that contain fewer electrons than protons have a net positive charge and are called ==cations==.
- Ions that contain more electrons than protons have a net negative charge and are called ==anions==.

Ionic compounds contain both cations and anions in a ratio that results in no net electrical charge.

---

The electrostatic energy of the interaction between two charged particles is proportional to the product of the charges on the particles and inversely proportional to the distance between them:

electrostatic energy $\propto \dfrac{Q_1Q_2}{r}$

<span style="color:#808080">Q1 and  Q2 are the electrical charges on particles 1 and 2, and  r is the distance between them.</span>

If the electrostatic energy is positive, the particles repel each other; if the electrostatic energy is negative, the particles are attracted to each other.

---
<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Physical Properties of Ionic and Covalent Compounds</u></span>

Ionic and covalent compounds have different physical properties.
- Ionic compounds form hard crystalline solids that melt at high temperatures and are resistant to evaporation
- Most covalent compounds consist of discrete molecules held together by comparatively weak intermolecular forces, even though the atoms within each molecule are held together by strong intramolecular covalent bonds

|   Ionic Compounds   | Covalent Molecular Substances  |
|:-------------------:|:------------------------------:|
|     hard solids     | gases, liquids, or soft solids |
| high melting points |       low melting points       |
|     nonvolatile     |            volatile            |


---

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Summary</u></span>

The atoms in chemical compounds are held together by attractive electrostatic interactions known as chemical bonds. Ionic compounds contain positively and negatively charged ions in a ratio that results in an overall charge of zero. The ions are held together in a regular spatial arrangement by electrostatic forces. Atoms or groups of atoms that possess a net electrical charge are called ions; they can have either a positive charge (cations) or a negative charge (anions). Ions can consist of one atom (monatomic ions) or several (polyatomic ions). The charges on monatomic ions of most main group elements can be predicted from the location of the element in the periodic table. Ionic compounds usually form hard crystalline solids with high melting points.