
In a 2-page essay response, discuss how various ethnicities are impacted by the  
epidemic of obesity in regard to cultural background, education, and social trends  
of American culture.

link to video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=slwgXXVXM3I

---

Wend O'Neal from New Orleans states: "I do a lot of fast food and I actually hate fast food, I dont like the way it tastes but Ill get it because its cheap and I can get it on the run" (03:17-03:25).


lack of affordability for treatment for preventing obesity.


scary facts:

"The united states is the worlds fattest developed nation with an obesity rate double of that in many European countries" (05:02-05:10).

"Blacks have a 50% higher prevalence of obesity, and Hispanics 25% higher than whites" (05:19-05:25).


serving sizes for food has gotten significantly higher in recent years.

Lauren Vanderpool speaks on the obesity problem in the southeast and states, "They're used to what they've been exposed to, and what they've been exposed to is liquor stores, corner stores, and carry outs." (14:59-15:10)

#### <u>Corporations fight against actions to fight obesity</u>
Actions to stop the spread of obesity, such as New York's failed attempt to implement a soda tax. The documentary states that when the bill for the tax was proposed, "the American Beverage Association spent more than 10 million dollars on their ad campaign defeating the bill" (08:20-08:36)


a large portion of the issue comes from the US gov'ts failure who regulate the issue, as little is done to prevent the issue.



highly processed food is much cheaper and more accessible compared to fresh food.
- with many people of color living in  poorer areas, it is far more likely for them to resort to these unhealthy foods such as fast food since they aren't given any other affordable options.



"We are perpetuating a culture of junk food that is literally making kids sick" (21:32-21:40)

Marlene Schwartz, a member at the Rudd Center for Food policy states, "The economics of our food structure are completely working against public health... you almost couldn't have designed a worse environment where you take your least healthy products... and you make them significantly less expensive than your most healthy products" (22:25-22:44)