
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0v6KBGr5IzY

The Creepy Line. Directed by M.A. Taylor

Produced by Lightspeed Pictures and Wandering Foot Productions

From 2018

---

How well do you feel the documentary highlights this very troubling epidemic? 

What measures can parents, educators, law enforcement, and general members of the community take to minimize, or ultimately eliminate this horrific social trend? 

Cite dialogue and scenes from the documentary to support your ideas and analysis.


The documentary does a great job at highlighting the scary truth about the issues that the current online world is facing,
- Feeding off of User interaction
- Algorithms that present Bias
- User Manipulation

---

## Feeding off of User Interaction
---

These companies make a large sum of their money off of selling user data to advertisers, and the best way to get this data is through the maximization of user interaction. 

6:10-6:16 - "Google handles 65% of all Internet search in the US and even more overseas."

<span style="color:#00b050">Google started purely as a search engine with algorithms far ahead of any competitor.</span>

8:17-8:30 - "This information, essentially are building blocks. They are constructing a profile of you, and that profile is real, its detailed, its granular, and it never goes away."

<span style="color:#00b050">Google uses this profile of you for targeted advertising.</span>

9:07-9:10 - "That is where Google gets more than 90% of its revenue."

<span style="color:#00b050">When the first smartphones were invented and technology started becoming a part of peoples everyday life, interaction time on the internet became a large focus of many companies as it directly correlated with money gained. This led many companies, including Google, to expand their reach and accessibility through the introduction of new apps.</span>

- One thing google did was develop their mobile OS called Android, which tracks users data to further build their secret "profile."
- 12:52-13:03 - "'When Google develops another tool for us to use, they're doing it not to make our lives easier, they're doing it to get another source of information about us."
- Can be seen in Google Docs, Google Maps, Google Chrome, and most google products.

13:34-13:40 - "They don't sell you anything. They sell you! We are the product."

## Algorithms Presenting a Bias
---

<span style="color:#0070c0">Anytime you search something on online the results get filtered and you are showed the top pages based off of your search term. This is done through the use of an algorithm and is a key decider in what gets presented to you. However, when performing a search it is highly likely that there will be a "bias" in the results that you see.</span>

17:03-17:12 - "The problem with that is that whatever the assumptions are that Google operates under are going to be the filters that determine how the world is simplified and presented."

18:16-18:25 - "It would be useless for us unless it was biased. That's precisely what we want. We want it to be biased."

<span style="color:#0070c0">This issue of bias can be extremely prevalent in many serious real world scenarios where people are asking questions about whats going on. This bias can lead large numbers of people into believing false information based off of whatever their top result was on their search engine.</span>

18:56-19:10 - "It will always favor one dog food over another, one online music service over another, one comparative shopping service over another, and one candidate over another."

<span style="color:#0070c0">The unbiased algorithms that DO currently exist in many of these platforms are currently only focused on removing content that isn't allowed on the platform.</span>

<span style="color:#0070c0">These algorithms also lead to a form virtual tunnel vision where you are fed only information that you are expected to want based off of your digital "profile."</span>

21:30-21:39 - "The problem with that is that you only see what you already know, and that's not a good thing, because you also need to see what you don't know, because otherwise you cant learn"

## User Manipulation
---

<span style="color:#ffff00">Many of the leaders of the online industry running the largest websites also manipulate their users as a way to have increased interaction.</span>

29:03-29:21 - Brad Shear, managing partner at shear law, states "Facebook constantly manipulates their users. They do it by the things that they insert into the news feeds, they do it by the types of posts they allow their users to see, and the fact that they actually decided to do psychological experiments on their users is something that I think a lot of people need to really fully understand."

<span style="color:#ffff00">Search engines like googles have the ability to manipulate users opinions on a topic through the biases that exist within the autofill feature. These autofill results always follow the same general idea with mostly positives, allowing no second guess for an alternate opinion.</span>

<span style="color:#ffff00">If was found that this can actually be fixed if you remove some of the bias that these results tend to have:</span>

38:16-38:26 - "...but now we know that if you allow just one negative to appear in that list, it wipes out the shift completely, because of a phenomenon called negativity bias."

38:36-38:44 - "Turns out that Google is manipulating your opinions from the very first character that you type into the search bar."

<span style="color:#ffff00">It shows how much power they have over the mindset of billions of users.</span>

## Mass Control
---

<span style="color:#ff0000">These leading giants of the online industry such as google and Meta both have an extremely large grip over the entire world. The amount of control they have is something that should not be overlooked and that needs to be regulated.</span>

1:17:04-08 - "The more rope we give them, the sooner we are all hanged."

1:18:07-20 - "We live in a world today where these tech giants have a level of control and an abili8ty to manipulate us that Stalin, Mao, Hitler, and Mussolini could only have dreamed of."

## What can be done
---

More competition in the tech world would help reduce these issues.