
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=abeYukTNmj0

3 Days that Stopped the World

directed by Phil Rees

2021

---

In a 2-Page essay response, analyze the data presented in this documentary and take a stance on its validity, as well as its effectiveness in regard to presenting a realistic look at the origin of the Coronavirus. 

Cite scenes, dialogue, and images to support your response.



---

Yang Jun and Chen Wei are investigative journalists from Beijing sent to Wuhan, China to find more details about the virus 3 days before the lockdown started.

Their recordings were censored by the Chinese gov't and this documentary goes over their discoveries.

Much info on the virus ended up getting covered up, and hidden for the public in Wuhan.

Suspicious behavior is seen around the seafood markets (where the virus is believed to have originated from), when yang tries to further investigate and speak to shop owners, he is interrupted by police.

Yang was told he needs a permit to film in Wuhan as he is not from there, so he says he will speak to the Publicity department.

According to the documentary, "The publicity department is often called the propaganda department. It reports directly to the communist party." (13:32-42).

Yang was later told by the department that he did have the right to record in Wuhan, however the reality of the situation was different.

---

After the failure at the food markets, Yang seeks to investigate the hospitals in Wuhan to see how patients are being treated. The hospitals containing suspected patients of the virus are separating them in from the rest of the patient, putting them in a 'isolation ward.'

Yang discovers how poor the treatments is, the hospitals are packed with many people supposedly having the virus to the point where the hospitals are unable to manage them all.

A social media post is shown from a Wuhan resident who claims that the hospitals are "Filled with fever patients," and "...so crowded that many people are lying on the corridor floor" (23:09-21).

Chen Wei looks into the wild animal markets as there was a high belief that the virus originated form wild animals, however, many of the stalls had been already been closed before the outbreak.

Yang returns to the seafood markets and finds them to be in lockdown with many police officers suspiciously investigating the area. When Yang tries to film their actions, he is illegally told that he cant film, despite him having the permission to do so from the publicity department.

Yang arrives at one of the leading hospitals in Wuhan that is strictly taking in COVID victims, when he tries to record, he is once again shut down. Yang also records a family who brought their 78 year old grandfather in to be treated, however he too was not allowed in, and they were provided little to no explanation for why.

The way that Wuhan was treating the whole situation was absolutely horrible and many people were unable to get the treatment they needed.

before the lockdown, many people opted to 'flee Wuhan,' the documentary states that "300,000 people fled Wuhan the night before the closure" (45:44-48).

According to the documentary, "9 Chinese journalists have been arrested or disappeared since the lockdown in Wuhan began" (47:19-23).

---

## Final Opinions
---

The documentary provided an interesting insight on to how the situation in Wuhan was being treated before the lockdown. Although there was some interesting things to see, the documentary seemed to create more questions than it aimed to answer. The suspicious behavior seen could be explained by a lot of different variable, but the treatment of the situation was no doubt poor. 

speak on the:
- hiding of information
- poor medical treatment for victims of the virus.