All matter has physical and chemical properties.

<u>Physical Properties</u> - characteristics that scientists can measure without changing the composition of the sample under study, such as mass, color, and volume.

<u>Chemical properties</u> - the characteristic ability of a substance to react to form new substances.

Physical properties can be ==extensive== or ==intensive==:
- <u>Extensive</u> - Dependent on the amount of substance. Includes mass, weight, and volume. **Differs based on amount.**
- <u>Intensive</u> - Does NOT depend on the amount of substance. Includes color, melting point, boiling point, electrical conductivity, and physical state at a given temperature. **Always the same.**

Scientists commonly measure intensive properties to determine a substance’s identity, whereas extensive properties convey information about the amount of the substance in a sample.

---

<u>Density</u> ($\rho$) is defined as mass per unit volume and is usually expressed in grams per cubic centimeter (g/cm^3).

$D = \dfrac{M}{V}$

---

<u>Physical changes</u> are changes in which no chemical bonds are broken or formed. When a substance undergoes physical change, the compounds and elements making up the the substance are the same as well as its properties.

**Physical changes involve moving molecules around, but not changing them.** 
(ex: Melting, freezing, vaporization, and condensation.)

<u>Chemical changes</u> occur when bonds are broken and/or formed between molecules or atoms. This means that one substance with a certain set of properties (such as melting point, color, taste, etc) is turned into a different substance with different properties.

(ex: Burning paper.)


