Measurements may be <u>accurate</u>, meaning that the measured value is the same as the true value; they may be <u>precise</u>, meaning that multiple measurements give nearly identical values (i.e., reproducible results); they may be both accurate and precise; or they may be neither accurate nor precise.

<u>The goal of scientists is to obtain measured values that are both accurate and precise.</u>

---

 <u>Significant figures</u> - numbers that describe the value without exaggerating the degree to which it is known to be accurate.

Chemists report as significant all numbers known with absolute certainty, plus one more digit that is understood to contain some uncertainty. 

The uncertainty in the final digit is usually assumed to be ±1, unless otherwise stated.


<u>Significant figure rules:</u>
1. Any nonzero digit is significant.
2. Any zeros between nonzero digits are significant. The number 2005, for example, has four significant figures.
3. Any zeros used as a placeholder preceding the first nonzero digit are not significant. (ex: 0.05 has 1 SF, 0.050 has 2 SF, 5.0 has 2 SF)
4. When a number does not contain a decimal point, zeros added after a nonzero number may or may not be significant. (ex: 100 could have 1, 2, or 3 SF)
5. Integers obtained either by counting objects or from definitions are exact numbers, which are considered to have infinitely many significant figures. (ex: if you counted 4 objects, then 4 has an infinite number of SF (ie. it represents 4.000...))

---

Mathematical operations are carried out using all the digits given and then rounding the final result to the correct number of significant figures to obtain a reasonable answer. This method avoids compounding inaccuracies by successively rounding intermediate calculations. 

After you complete a calculation, you may have to round the last significant figure up or down depending on the value of the digit that follows it. If the digit is 5 or greater, then the number is rounded up:

**Ex:** 
When rounded to three significant figures, 5.215 is 5.22, whereas 5.213 is 5.21. 

5.005 kg becomes 5.01 kg, whereas 5.004 kg becomes 5.00 kg.


The procedures for dealing with significant figures are different for addition and subtraction versus multiplication and division.

---
<u>Adding and Subtracting</u>

When we add or subtract measured values, the value with the fewest significant figures to the right of the decimal point determines the number of significant figures to the right of the decimal point in the answer. 

Drawing a vertical line to the right of the column corresponding to the smallest number of significant figures is a simple method of determining the proper number of significant figures for the answer:

$3240.7+21.236 = 3261.9|36$

*The line indicates that the digits 3 and 6 are not significant in the answer. These digits are not significant because the values for the corresponding places in the other measurement are unknown (3240.7??).*

---
<u>Multiplying and Dividing</u>

When we multiply or divide measured values, the answer is limited to the smallest number of significant figures in the calculation; thus,

$42.9 \times 8.323 = 357.057 = 357$

*Although the second number in the calculation has four significant figures, we are justified in reporting the answer to only three significant figures because the first number in the calculation has only three significant figures.*

An exception to this rule occurs when multiplying a number by an integer:

$12.793 \times 12 = 155.516$ 

*In this case, the number of significant figures in the answer is determined by the number 12.973, because we are in essence adding 12.973 to itself 12 times. The correct answer is therefore 155.516.*

---

On a calculator:

$5.0\:kg \div 3.0\:L = 1.666666667\:kg/L$

Using significant figures this is only $1.7\:kg/L$