<u>Dimensional analysis</u> is the conversion between an amount in one unit to the corresponding amount in a desired unit using various conversion factors. This is valuable because certain measurements are more accurate or easier to find than others.

---

<u>Using Dimensional Analysis in Calculations</u>

The equation relating kinetic energy to mass and velocity is:

$E_{kinetics} = \dfrac{1}{2}mass \times velocity^{2}$

---
<u>Performing Dimensional Analysis</u>

Performing dimensional analysis begins with finding the appropriate conversion factors. Then, you simply multiply the values together such that the units cancel by having equal units in the numerator and the denominator.

Example:

Imagine that a chemist wants to measure out 0.214 mL of benzene, but lacks the equipment to accurately measure such a small volume. The chemist, however, is equipped with an analytical balance capable of measuring to $\pm0.0001\:g$. Looking in a reference table, the chemist learns the density of benzene $(\rho = 0.8765\:g/mL)$. How many grams of benzene should the chemist use?

<u>Solution</u>

$0.214\:\cancel{mL} \left(\dfrac{0.8765\:g}{1\:\cancel{mL}}\right) =  0.187571\:g$

---

<u>Summary</u>

Dimensional analysis is used in numerical calculations, and in converting units. It can help us identify whether an equation is set up correctly (i.e. the resulting units should be as expected). Units are treated similarly to the associated numerical values, i.e., if a variable in an equation is supposed to be squared, then the associated dimensions are squared, etc.