The solvent in aqueous solutions is water, whilst the solvent in non-aqueous solutions is anything other than water. 

---

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Polar Substances</u></span> 

[[Polar Bond]] - a chemical bond in which there is an unequal distribution of charge between the bonding atoms.

Ex: Water ($H_{2}O$) is a polar substance because its hydrogen atoms are electron poor, giving them a partial positive charge ($\delta^{+}$) and the oxygen atom is electron rich, giving it a negative charge ($2\delta^{-}$).

---

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Electrolytes</u></span> 

<u>Electrolyte</u> - any compound that can form ions when dissolved in water. Can be strong or weak.

When <u>strong electrolytes</u> dissolve, the constituent ions dissociate completely, producing aqueous solutions that conduct electricity very well. **This is due to the strong electrostatic interactions they have with the solvent.**

When <u>weak electrolytes</u> dissolve, they produce relatively few ions in solution and do not completely dissociate. **This is due to the weak electrostatic interactions they have with the solvent.**

<u>Nonelectrolytes</u> - a substance that dissolves in water to form neutral molecules and has essentially no effect on electrical conductivity. When dissolved in water, they have no effect on conductivity.

****<span style="font-weight:bold; font-style:italic; font-style:italic; color:#ffc000">Rule of thumb:</span>**
- Ionic substances and carboxylic acids are <u>electrolytes</u>;.
- Alcohols, aldehydes, and ketones are <u>nonelectrolytes</u>.

If the compound is ionic and dissolves, it is a strong electrolyte that will dissociate in water completely to produce a solution that conducts electricity well. 

If the compound is covalent and organic, determine whether it contains the carboxylic acid group. If the compound contains this group, it is a weak electrolyte. If not, it is a nonelectrolyte.

---

<span style="color:#00b0f0"><u>Summary</u></span> 

Aqueous solutions can be classified as polar or nonpolar depending on how well they conduct electricity. Most chemical reactions are carried out in solutions, which are homogeneous mixtures of two or more substances. In a solution, a solute (the substance present in the lesser amount) is dispersed in a solvent (the substance present in the greater amount). Aqueous solutions contain water as the solvent, whereas nonaqueous solutions have solvents other than water. Polar substances, such as water, contain asymmetric arrangements of polar bonds, in which electrons are shared unequally between bonded atoms. Polar substances and ionic compounds tend to be most soluble in water because they interact favorably with its structure. In aqueous solution, dissolved ions become hydrated; that is, a shell of water molecules surrounds them. Substances that dissolve in water can be categorized according to whether the resulting aqueous solutions conduct electricity. Strong electrolytes dissociate completely into ions to produce solutions that conduct electricity well. Weak electrolytes produce a relatively small number of ions, resulting in solutions that conduct electricity poorly. Nonelectrolytes dissolve as uncharged molecules and have no effect on the electrical conductivity of water.